A batch window is "a period of less-intensive online activity",[5] when the computer system is able to run batch jobs without interference from online systems.

Many early computer systems offered only batch processing, so jobs could be run any time within a 24-hour day. With the advent of transaction processing the online applications might only be required from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., leaving two shifts available for batch work, in this case the batch window would be sixteen hours. The problem is not usually that the computer system is incapable of supporting concurrent online and batch work, but that the batch systems usually require access to data in a consistent state, free from online updates until the batch processing is complete.

In a bank, for example, so-called end-of-day (EOD) jobs include interest calculation, generation of reports and data sets to other systems, printing statements, and payment processing. This coincides with the concept of Cutover, where transaction and data are cut off for a particular day's batch activity and any further data is contributed to the next following day's batch activity (this is the reason for messages like "deposits after 3 PM will be processed the next day").

The batch window is further complicated by the actual run-time of a particular batch activity. Some batches in banking can take between 5-9 hours of run time, coupled with global constraints some batch activity is broken up or even stalled to allow periodic use of databases mid batch (usually in read-only) to support automated testing scripts that may run in the evening hours or outsourced\contract testing and development resources abroad. More complex problems arise when institutions both have batch activities that may be dependent meaning both batches have to complete in the same batch window.

As requirements for online systems uptime expanded to support globalization, the Internet, and other business requirements the batch window shrank and increasing emphasis was placed on techniques that would require online data to be available for a maximum amount of time.